---
title: "Virginia is for Horse Lovers"
date: "2021-08-30"
template: "post"
draft: false
slug: "virginia-is-for-horse-lovers"
category: "Defining Moments"
tags:
  - "Showjumping history"
  - "Personal heroes"
description: "I can remember being in my late teenage years and spending my weekend evenings in the Anderson Coliseum at the Virginia Horse Center - 600 acres of horse heaven nestled in the crisp countryside."
socialImage: "/media/touch-of-class-thoroughbred.jpg"
---

- [Touch of Class and Joe Fargis at the 1984 Summer Olympics](touch-of-class-thoroughbred.jpg)
  Photo Credit: equestriancoachblog.com

Most people don't know this about me, but I skipped my senior year of high school by graduating early so I could spend a gap year as a working student at various hunter/jumper farms on the East Coast in South Carolina and Virginia. Virginia is where I fell in love with the crisp countryside air, the simple life of having few dining options and even fewer entertainment options, and what a joy it was to work with horses who lived on acres and acres of beautiful rolling hills, almost 24/7.

Billie Rae Croll housed me at her BRC Stables right down the road from the Virginia Horse Center. Her mother raced Thoroughbreds and the ones that didn't win came to Billie to be restarted as hunters or jumpers.

> "How do you know what they're going to be?" I remember asking her.
> "I don't," she replied. "They tell me what they want to be."

The first time I visited the Virginia Horse Center, I was in awe. 600 acres, 19 show rings and my personal favorite - the Anderson Coliseum which seats 4,000 people. It was there that I first watched Joe Fargis compete in real life.

As soon as he trotted into the arena on a skinny and small Thoroughbred, I knew exactly who that lanky, forward perched rider was. Joe Fargis was a member of one of the most iconic teams in American History - he rode to individual and team gold on the now infamous mare, Touch of Class.

Joe Fargis would compete nearly every weekend I attended the horse show, and he almost always won. Other riders would gallop in on their overpriced, overfed imported Warmbloods. They'd usually take rails - not having been bred for the right mix of power and agility. This was the beginning of the current era of importing pre-made push-button Warmbloods that were practically factory produced by the Europeans. This was before we realized they weren't ever actually sending us their A string horses, even though they still came with six-figure price tags. Many trainers - young and old - hopped on the European import band wagon. Why? Because not only did they make a ridiculous amount in commission selling six-figure horses to people who barely knew how to ride, but that also meant they got an all expenses paid horse shopping vacation courtesy of the client. Many fell for the glitz and the glamour. But not Joe Fargis.

He'd gallop into the ring on his tiny Thoroughbreds - he liked them small, just like Touch of Class. He always rode in a hunt seat - hunched forward with his shoulders, at times looking like he might butt heads with his own horse. His style could be described in three words: light, quick, agile. Where other horses added a step, Joe left it out. Where the Warmbloods almost always took the longer turns, Joe would take the inside. If there was an option to slice the fence, you know he always took it. He almost always stepped foot into the ring and anyone who didn't know him would immediately whisper to the person sitting next to them:

> "What does he think he's doing in the Grand Prix on that Thoroughbred?"

The usual commentary centered around the size of the horse, having seen dozens of riders go before him on gigantic heavy-boned European Warmbloods, the American Thoroughbred was light, medium-boned, lean, and has the stamina to go for hours. You can think of the Warmbloods as the meatheads at the gym; the ones that do all the isolated movements to build their muscle mass, but that forget to train for mobility and flexibility. Thoroughbreds are the kinds of horses that can eat and eat and eat and not gain weight. They are high stamina, fast, and above all else: smart.

I mostly grew up riding Thoroughbreds and cross-breeds that were pulled from slaughter pens. I come from a humble middle class household that was just lucky to have survived the 2008 stock market crash (just barely). Thoroughbreds are great teachers, especially for young kids, because they're exceptionally inquisitive and in tune to their environment. Though temperament varies widely dependent upon both nature and nurture, the breed is know for being smart and quick to learn, on top of an admirable agility. They peak when they are younger, lighter, and faster than your average Warmblood.

Many years after I left Virginia and found myself managing a private equestrian estate for a wealthy CEO, I met one of Touch of Class' first owners, though I didn't know it at the time. I had been promoted from dog sitter, to barn hand, to exercise rider. She had been exercising his horses during the sumnmer and was getting ready to depart before the winter circuit began, but she spent a few months teaching me the ropes of each of his vastly different and well loved horses.

> "You know, everybody told me that mare was never going to amount to anything. They said she was
> too small and nothing special to look at. They told me she was just an okay jumper. It took
> someone like Joe to see that she was so much more than that," she said.

I don't aspire to be just another rider on just another imported Warmblood just winning because someone bought her a push-button ride.

I aspire to be something more. I aspire to bring back the glory days of the sport, in the 1970s and 1980s, when an American could make a respectable living riding, caring for and competing American-bred sporthorses.

I have a vision. And it starts with my very own Thoroughbred.
